## Concomitant targeting of BCL2 with venetoclax and MAPK signaling with cobimetinib in acute myeloid leukemia models

1 Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA;  Department of Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical University, 2 Harbin, China;  Department of Oncology Biomarkers, Genentech, South San Francisco, 3 CA, USA;  Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of 4 Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA;  College of Medicine, Sharjah 5 Institute for Medical Research, University of Sharjah, Sharjah, UAE;  Division of 6 Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA;  AbbVie Inc., North Chicago, IL, USA and  Department of 7 8 Translational Oncology, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, USA

Lina Han, 1,2 Qi Zhang, 1 Monique Dail, 3 Ce Shi, 2 Antonio Cavazos, 1 Vivian R. Ruvolo, 1 Yang Zhao, 4 Eugene Kim, 3 Mohamed Rahmani, 5,6 Duncan H. Mak, 1 Sha S. Jin, 7 Jun Chen, 7 Darren C. Phillips, 7 Paul Bottecelli Koller, 1 Rodrigo Jacamo, 1 Jared K. Burks, 1 Courtney DiNardo, 1 Naval Daver, 1 Elias Jabbour, 1 Jing Wang, 4 Hagop M. Kantarjian, 1 Michael Andreeff, 1 Steven Grant, 6 Joel D. Leverson, 7 Deepak Sampath 8 and Marina Konopleva 1

## ABSTRACT

T acquisition of mutations controlling several cellular processes, requirhe  pathogenesis  of  acute  myeloid  leukemia  (AML)  involves  serial ing combination therapies affecting key downstream survival nodes in order to treat the disease effectively. The BCL2 selective inhibitor venetoclax has potent anti-leukemia efficacy; however, resistance can occur due to its inability to inhibit MCL1, which is stabilized by the MAPK pathway. In this study, we aimed to determine the anti-leukemia efficacy of concomitant targeting of the BCL2 and MAPK pathways by venetoclax and the MEK1/2 inhibitor cobimetinib, respectively. The combination demonstrated synergy in seven of 11 AML cell lines, including those resistant to single agents, and showed growth-inhibitory activity in over 60% of primary samples from patients  with  diverse  genetic  alterations.  The  combination  markedly impaired leukemia progenitor functions, while maintaining normal progenitors.  Mass  cytometry  data  revealed  that  BCL2  protein  is  enriched  in leukemia stem/progenitor cells, primarily  in  venetoclax-sensitive  samples, and that cobimetinib suppressed cytokine-induced pERK and pS6 signaling pathways. Through proteomic profiling studies, we identified several pathways inhibited downstream of MAPK that contribute to the synergy of the combination. In OCI-AML3 cells, the combination downregulated MCL1 protein  levels  and  disrupted  both  BCL2:BIM  and  MCL1:BIM  complexes, releasing  BIM  to  induce  cell  death.  RNA  sequencing  identified  several enriched pathways, including MYC, mTORC1, and p53 in cells sensitive to the  drug  combination. In  vivo , the  venetoclax-cobimetinib  combination reduced leukemia burden in xenograft models using genetically engineered OCI-AML3 and MOLM13 cells. Our data thus provide a rationale for combinatorial blockade of MEK and BCL2 pathways in AML.

## Introduction

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is characterized by the uncontrolled proliferation and arrested differentiation of abnormal stem and progenitor cells. Standard induction chemotherapy induces a high rate of complete remission but fails to improve overall survival especially in elderly patients with AML. 1,2 Genes significantly mutated in AML can be organized into several functional categories that are associated with enhanced proliferation, impaired differentiation, deregulated chromatin modification, and DNA methylation. 1,3 Therefore,  co-targeting  downstream  pathways  that  contribute  to

<!-- image -->

## Haematologica 2020

Volume 105(3):697-707

## Correspondence:

Received: August 28, 2018.

Accepted: May 22, 2019.

Pre-published: May 23, 2019.

MARINA KONOPLEVA mkonople@mdanderson.org

doi:10.3324/haematol.2018.205534

Check the online version for the most updated information on this article, online supplements, and information on authorship &amp; disclosures: www.haematologica.org/content/105/3/697

## ©2020 Ferrata Storti Foundation

Material published in Haematologica is covered by copyright. All rights are reserved to the Ferrata Storti Foundation. Use of published material is allowed under the following terms and conditions:

https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/legalcode. Copies of published material are allowed for personal or internal use. Sharing published material for non-commercial purposes is subject to the following conditions:

https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/legalcode, sect. 3. Reproducing and sharing published material for commercial purposes is not allowed without permission in writing from the publisher.

<!-- image -->

leukemogenesis may deliver the greatest clinical efficacy.

The anti-apoptotic protein BCL2 has been studied extensively for its role in leukemic transformation and chemoresistance. BCL2 is highly expressed in AML leukemia stem cells (LSC) containing low levels of reactive oxygen species which are resistant to chemotherapy. 4,5 BCL2 inhibitors have been shown to eradicate AML LSC and sensitize chronic myeloid  leukemia  LSC  to  tyrosine  kinase  inhibitors. Oncogenic  dependency  on  BCL2  was  found  in  AML patients carrying mutations in IDH1 and IDH2. 6,7 A recent study used BH3 profiling to discover that co-inhibition of BCL2 with tyrosine kinase inhibitors facilitated eradication of  genetically  diverse  AML  in  patient-derived  xenograft (PDX) models. We have reported the anti-leukemia potency 8 of venetoclax (ABT-199/GDC-0199), an orally bioavailable BH3  mimetic  that  selectively  binds  with  high  affinity  to BCL2,  but  lacks  affinity  for  BCL-XL  and  MCL1,  in  AML models. 9 In a phase II clinical trial, venetoclax monotherapy had clinical activity in patients with relapsed or refractory AML with a tolerable safety profile. 10 However, the inability of venetoclax to inhibit MCL1 causes resistance in leukemia cells that require MCL1 for survival. 11,12

The  RAF/MEK/ERK  (MAPK)  cascade,  a  major  effector pathway activated in 70%-80% of patients with AML, is activated by upstream mutant proteins such as FLT3, KIT, and  RAS. 13-15 The  MAPK  pathway  regulates  BCL2  family proteins  by  stabilizing  anti-apoptotic  MCL1 11,16 and inactivating pro-apoptotic BIM (BCL2L11). 17 Monotherapy with MEK inhibitors has had limited clinical efficacy. 15 Recently it was shown that MAPK signaling activation contributed to primary resistance to an IDH2 inhibitor 18 and acquired resistance to venetoclax, 19 suggesting that combination regimens that  include  MEK  inhibitors  could  be  efficacious  in  these patients.  Cobimetinib  (GDC-0973)  is  an  allosteric  MEK inhibitor  with  antitumor  activity  in  BRAF-  and  KRASmutant  tumor  cells, 20 and  was  recently  approved  to  treat patients with metastatic melanoma. Its anti-AML efficacy, particularly in combination with venetoclax, is unknown.

Furthermore,  biomarkers  predictive  of  response  to  this combination in AML are unknown. Suppression of downstream  pERK  does  not  predict  sensitivity  to  MEK  inhibition. 21 In melanoma,  it  has  been  demonstrated  that mTORC1/2 and pS6 activities are associated with acquired resistance to MEK inhibitors and suppression of pS6 may serve  as  a  biomarker  to  predict  clinical  response  to  MEK inhibitors. 22,23 The role of pS6 in response to MEK and BCL2 inhibition has not been addressed.

In  this  study,  we  evaluated  the  anti-leukemia  effects  of concomitant BCL2 and MAPK blockade by venetoclax and cobimetinib in AML cell lines, primary patients' samples, and xenograft murine models. Through the use of reverse-phase protein  arrays  (RPPA)  and  RNA  sequencing,  we  identified pharmacodynamic markers that correlated with the efficacy of  the  combination  treatment,  in  particular  activated  pS6 (Ser235/236),  which  discriminated  combination-sensitive from -insensitive AML cells. Our data support the rationale for dual inhibition of the BCL2 and MEK pathways.

## Methods

## Patients' samples, acute myeloid leukemia cell lines, and reagents

Bone marrow and peripheral blood samples were collected from patients with AML or healthy donors after informed con- sent  had  been  obtained  in  accordance  with  the  Institutional Review Board of The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.  The  cell  line  culture  methodology  is  described  in  the Online Supplementary Methods .

## Assays and other methods

Details of the CellTiter-Glo proliferation assay, colony-forming cell assay, electrochemiluminescent enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, RPPA, and RNA sequencing are provided in the Online Supplementary Methods . Antibody conjugation for mass  cytometry  staining  and  the  spanning-tree  progression analysis of density-normalized events (SPADE) analysis are also explained in detail in the Online Supplementary Methods .

## Apoptosis in primary acute myeloid leukemia samples

As previously reported, 24 18 primary AML peripheral blood mononuclear cells or AML PDX samples were cultured in LSC medium. Viable AML CD45 dim blast cells were enumerated by using  CountBright  counting  beads  (Cat.  C36950;  Invitrogen, Carlsbad,  CA,  USA)  with  concurrent  annexin  V  and  DAPI detection  on  a  Gallios  Flow  Cytometer  (Beckman  Coulter, Indianapolis, IN, USA). Data analysis and additional details are included in the Online Supplementary Methods .

## In vivo study of cobimetinib and venetoclax in acute myeloid leukemia xenograft mouse models

The  animal  studies  were  performed  in  accordance  with guidelines approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at MD Anderson. Nonobese diabetic/severe combined  immunodeficient  gamma  IL3-GM-SF  (NSG-SGM3  or NSGS)  mice  (female,  8-10  weeks  old)  were  purchased  from Jackson  Laboratory  (Bar  Harbor,  ME,  USA).  The  mice  were injected  intravenously  with  OCI-AML3-Luci-GFP  (1.0×10 ) 6 cells, which were lentivirally transduced with firefly luciferase. Leukemia  engraftment  was  confirmed  1  week  after  injection through  a  noninvasive in  vivo bioluminescence  imaging  (BLI) system (Xenogen, Alameda, CA, USA) after injection of a Dluciferin  (4  mg/mouse)  substrate.  Mice  were  distributed  into four  groups  (11  mice/group)  with  comparable  tumor  burden and  dosed  daily  for  4  weeks  with  one  of  the  following  oral preparations: vehicle, cobimetinib (10 mg/kg), venetoclax (100 mg/kg),  or  cobimetinib  plus  venetoclax.  BLI  was  performed weekly to determine the extent of engraftment. Survival was monitored  as  an  endpoint.  A  similar  MOLM13  model  is described in the Online Supplementary Methods .

## Statistical analyses

The Student  -test was used to analyze the statistical signifit cance of differences between groups, both in vitro and in vivo . All statistical tests were two-sided, and the results are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation. A P value ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically  significant.  The  RPPA  and  RNA-sequencing  data analysis are described in the Online Supplementary Methods .

## Results

## Cobimetinib and venetoclax demonstrate synergistic anti-leukemia efficacy in acute myeloid leukemia cell lines in vitro

To assess the anti-leukemia activity of cobimetinib and venetoclax as single agents or in combination, we studied their  effects  on  cell  proliferation  of  11  AML  cell  lines (Table 1). The median inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ) values of single agents were determined in a dose-response

manner  using  CellTiter-Glo  (CTG)  assays  after  72  h  of drug  treatment.  The  IC 50 values  of  cobimetinib  (range, 0.002 µ M - 3.0 µ M) did not correlate with either the status of RAS mutations or the basal levels of p-ERK1/2 determined by flow cytometry (Table 1). To assess pharmacological interactions between cobimetinib and venetoclax, incremental doses were applied based on the IC 50 value of each drug. In seven of the 11 cell lines, combination of the agents elicited synergistic growth inhibition based on the Chou-Talalay method of analysis [combination index (CI) &lt;0.8]. 25 Cell lines with IC 50 values below the selected cutoff values (0.3 µ M for cobimetinib 20 and 0.1 µ M for venetoclax )  were  defined  as  sensitive  to  the  single  agent. 9 Patterns of response to single agents and the combination were  distinct.  Notably,  while  synergy  was  observed  in both  venetoclax-resistant  (MOLM14,  OCI-AML3,  NB4) and cobimetinib-resistant cell lines (KG1, MOLM13), the lowest CI value (0.12) was seen in venetoclaxsensitive/cobimetinib-resistant AML cells (KG1) (Figure 1).

## Cobimetinib and venetoclax demonstrate on-target suppression of cell proliferation and clonogenic potential of leukemia progenitors in a subset of primary acute myeloid leukemia cells ex vivo

The anti-leukemia activities of cobimetinib and venetoclax were examined in 18 primary samples with diverse genetic alterations, collected from patients with AML or spleen from PDX models (Table 2). Primary AML blasts were treated with cobimetinib and venetoclax alone or in combination at 0.1 µ M for 5 days in LSC medium to maintain the immature state of the leukemia cells. 24 Cobimetinib  alone  induced  minimal  cell  death  (specific apoptosis, 6.7 ± 5.9%), which was significantly enhanced when the drug was given in combination with venetoclax (27.7  ±  20.2%, P =0.001)  (Figure  2A,  left).  Cobimetinib inhibited cell proliferation in the majority of cases (34.2 ± 23.7%), and this suppression was more pronounced when the drug was combined with venetoclax (60.2 ± 28.8%, P &lt;0.001) (Figure  2A,  right).  Venetoclax  as  a  single  agent reduced  viable  cell  numbers  by  more  than  50%  in  six cases  (33.3%).  Three  of  the  four  AML  samples  demonstrating over 50% growth inhibition by the cobimetinib treatment carried the FLT3 -ITD and/or D835 point mutation (AML 12, 13, and 17). As previously reported, IDH -mutant AML samples were highly sensitive to venetoclax as a single agent (AML 2 and 15). Over 60% (11 of 18) of the patients' samples responded to the combination treatment,  including  those  insensitive  to  either  compound alone (AML 1, 8 and 11). Importantly, induction of apoptosis in AML stem/progenitor CD34 CD38 CD123 + -+ population following the combination treatment was observed in two out of four AML  samples  tested ( Online Supplementary  Figure  S1 ). The  clonogenic  potential  of myeloid progenitors was significantly suppressed by the combination (82.5 ± 20.0%), as compared to cobimetinib (38.3  ±  14.6%, P =0.01)  or  venetoclax  (41.9  ±  18.6%, P &lt;0.05) alone. Normal progenitor function was minimally affected (Figure 2B and Online Supplementary Figure S2 ).

To test the on-target efficacy of both agents, we developed a 28-parameter mass cytometry [time-of-flight mass spectrometry  (CyTOF)]  panel  comprising  antibodies against  surface  antigens  to  define  AML  stem/progenitor fractions and intracellular proteins of the BCL2 family and various  signaling  pathways 26 ( Online  Supplementary  Table S1 ). The CyTOF study was performed in AML13 (sensitive to the combination) and AML14 (resistant to the combination) samples (Figure 2C). SPADE trees were built and annotated using all cell surface markers ( Online Supplementary Table S1 ); the positive markers were included in the heat maps ( Online Supplementary Figure S3 ). BCL2 protein  levels  were  significantly  enriched  in  CD34 + stem/progenitor cells compared to CD34 -cells and BCL2 was expressed at a higher level in the venetoclax-sensitive sample (AML13) than in the venetoclax-resistant sample (AML14), consistent with our published data9 (Figure 2D). These results support the notion that venetoclax preferentially target LSC in AML. As previously reported, the cancer signaling network relies on the manner in which cancer cells respond to external stimuli rather than their basal phosphorylation state. 27 Therefore, following cobimetinib treatment, we stimulated primary AML cells with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) or stem cell factor (SCF) to study MEK downstream signaling pathways under conditions mimicking a cytokine-rich bone marrow

Table 1. Cytotoxicity of cobimetinib and venetoclax in acute myeloid leukemia cell lines.

| Cell line   | Mutations          |   Cobimetinib IC 50 ( µ M) |   Venetoclax IC 50 ( µ M) |   CI value |   p-ERK (R-MFI) |
|-------------|--------------------|----------------------------|---------------------------|------------|-----------------|
| MOLM13      | FLT3 -ITD          |                      0.46  |                     0.01  |       0.49 |            6.6  |
| MOLM14      | FLT3 -ITD          |                      0.16  |                     1.88  |       0.36 |            9.68 |
| MV4;11      | FLT3 -ITD          |                      0.29  |                     0.005 |       0.99 |           11.7  |
| TF-1*       | NRAS, TP53         |                      0.51  |                    10.3   |       1.51 |            2.56 |
| OCI-AML3    | NPM1, DNMT3A, NRAS |                      0.17  |                     2.9   |       0.29 |            8.67 |
| OCI-AML2    | DNMT3A             |                      0.002 |                     0.04  |       0.78 |            3.72 |
| THP1*       | NRAS, TP53         |                      0.56  |                    39.1   |       0.54 |            4.48 |
| KG1*        | ITGB8, SMC2        |                      3.06  |                     0.03  |       0.12 |            3.73 |
| NB4         | PML-RARA           |                      0.04  |                     0.73  |       0.3  |            2.34 |
| U937*       | PTPN11, WT1        |                      3     |                     9.75  |       0.88 |            3.3  |
| HL-60       | CDKN2A, TP53, NRAS |                      0.45  |                     0.004 |       0.89 |            3.83 |

Half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ) values were calculated on the basis of the number of viable cells quantified by CTG assay .  CI: combination index; R-MFI: relative median fluorescence intensity determined by the ratio of the signal in the antibody-stained cells/autofluorescence of unstained cells; ITD: internal tandem duplication.  *Data on gene mutations are from Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia: http://www .broadinstitute.org/ccle/home

microenvironment. The SPADE trees were colored based on  expression  levels  of  CD34.  In  AML13,  annotation  4 (6.5%  of  total  viable  cells)  represented  the  leukemia stem/progenitor  cell  population  by  phenotypically  positive  expression  of  CD34,  CD123,  CD25,  CD135,  and CD64. Annotation 8 accounted for 53.4% of total viable cells in AML14, and was highly positive for expression of CD34,  CD123,  CD117,  CD135,  and  CD64  ( Online Supplementary  Figure  S3 ).  In  both  samples,  we  observed low basal levels of pERK, which increased following GCSF stimulation (3.9-fold in AML13 and 5.7-fold increase in  AML14).  G-CSF-stimulated  pERK  in  both  patients' samples was largely inhibited by cobimetinib despite differential responses in proliferation assays (Figure 2C, D), indicating that suppression of pERK does not predict sensitivity to MEK inhibition and is consistent with previous reports. 21 Several studies have shown that suppression of mTORC1 and downstream pathways (especially S6) pre- dicted  sensitivity  to  MEK  inhibition. 21,22 We  found  that pS6  was  highly  activated  by  SCF  and  effectively  suppressed by cobimetinib in the cobimetinib-sensitive AML sample, whereas the cobimetinib-resistant AML sample did not demonstrate a response to SCF. As in this study, we treated cells overnight and transiently stimulated then for 10 min to look into activation of signal transduction pathways  (Figure  2).  Due  to  limited  exposure  to  the inhibitors (2 h), we were unable to detect changes in frequencies of AML stem/progenitor cells ( Online Supplementary Figure S4 ).

## Transcriptomic and proteomic profiles identify pharmacodynamic markers underlying responses to targeted agents

To identify the pharmacodynamic markers underlying the observed drug responses, we treated the 11 AML cell lines (Table 1) with cobimetinib and venetoclax as single

Figure 1. Anti-leukemia efficacy of cobimetinib and venetoclax in acute myeloid leukemia cell lines. Eleven acute myeloid leukemia cell lines were left untreated or treated with cobimetinib or venetoclax as single agents at 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, or 1.0 µ M for 72 h. Calcusyn software was used to calculate the median inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ) values. Combinations of the two drugs were then tested on the same cell lines at dose ranges of 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 times the IC 50 value of each compound. The combination index of each combination in each cell line was calculated on the basis on the luminescent intensity that correlated with number of viable cells determined by the CellTiter-Glo assay. Responses to treatment were categorized into four patterns: (i) sensitive to both drugs; (ii) sensitive only to cobimetinib and showing synergy for the combination; (iii) sensitive only to venetoclax and showing synergy for the combination; (iv) resistant to both drugs. AML: acute myeloid leukemia; Cobi: cobimetinib; Ven: venetoclax; CI: combination index

<!-- image -->

agents or in combination for 24 h at doses that were 0.5, 1 or 2 times their IC 50 values, followed by RPPA and RNA sequencing analysis. As already described, cells with IC 50 values &lt;0.3 µ M for cobimetinib or &lt;0.1 µ M for venetoclax were categorized as sensitive and those with IC 50 values above  these  cutoffs  were  considered  resistant.  For  the combination groups, CI values &lt;0.8 were considered synergistic.

Quantification of 90 proteins by RPPA identified several biomarkers that correlated with in vitro drug responses. For example,  S6  phosphorylation  at  Ser235/236  was  significantly  reduced  in  both  cobimetinib-sensitive  and  -resistant cell lines compared to untreated cells, with sensitive cells displaying higher basal phosphorylation at Ser235/236. Significant pMEK induction was observed in cobimetinib-resistant cell lines (Figure 3A). Several signaling  pathways  were  highly  activated  under  basal  condi- tions in cobimetinib-sensitive cells compared to resistant cells, including pS6 (Ser235/236), pRSK, pERK, p38MAPK and  pPTEN  ( Online  Supplementary  Figure  S5A ).  Proteins indicating responses to venetoclax treatment were largely limited to the caspase-dependent apoptotic cascade ( data not shown ). Higher levels of BAX and BCL2 and lower levels of BIM and pS6 (Ser240/244) correlated with sensitivity to venetoclax ( Online Supplementary Figure S5B ). In cell lines in which cobimetinib and venetoclax had a synergistic effect, several MEK downstream pathways were significantly  downregulated  and  cleaved  poly  (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) was detected, indicating induction of apoptosis (Figure 3B). These changes were not identified in cell lines in which a synergistic effect did not occur. The heat maps of the complete RPPA datasets are shown in Online Supplementary Figure S6 .

Western blotting was performed to validate the RPPA

Table 2. Clinical information for primary acute myeloid leukemia patients' samples.

| AML#                           | Status                         | WBC (x10 9 /L)                 | Blasts,%                       | Cytogenetics                   | Molecular mutations                  |
|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Samples for 5-day culture      | Samples for 5-day culture      | Samples for 5-day culture      | Samples for 5-day culture      | Samples for 5-day culture      | Samples for 5-day culture            |
| 1                              | NA                             | NA                             | NA                             | NA                             | IKZF1, NOTCH1, BCOR                  |
| 2                              | Relapsed                       | 34.3                           | 95                             | Complex                        | DNMT3A, IDH2, TP53, FLT3-N841        |
| 3                              | Relapsed                       | 21                             | 96                             | Complex                        | FLT3-ITD, NPM1, WT1, DNMT3A          |
| 4                              | Relapsed                       | 14.9                           | 98                             | Complex                        | JAK2, MPL, WT1                       |
| 5                              | Relapsed                       | 6.5                            | 94                             | 46,XY,t(9;11)(p22;q23)         | CEBPA, ATM                           |
| 6                              | Relapsed                       | 18.3                           | 57                             | 47,XY,+21                      | RUNX1, TET2                          |
| 7                              | Relapsed                       | 19.9                           | 69                             | NA                             | EVI1                                 |
| 8                              | De novo                        | 13.5                           | 18                             | 46,XX                          | EZH2, MPL                            |
| 9                              | De novo                        | 20.6                           | 74                             | NA                             | NA                                   |
| 10                             | De novo                        | 5.9                            | 21                             | Complex                        | TP53                                 |
| 11                             | NA                             | 40                             | 24                             | Complex                        | FLT3-D835                            |
| 12                             | Relapsed                       | 19                             | 94                             | 47,XY,+8                       | FLT3-D835, NOTCH1, ASXL1, KIT, TET2  |
| 13                             | Relapsed                       | 45.8                           | 94                             | 45,XY,der(17;18)               | FLT3 -ITD and D835                   |
| 14                             | Relapsed                       | 6.4                            | 72                             | Complex                        | EGFR, PTPN11, WT1                    |
| 15                             | Relapsed                       | 5.4                            | 25                             | 47,XY,+8                       | RUNX1, ASXL1, IDH1, KRAS, NRAS, TET2 |
| 16                             | De novo                        | 12.7                           | 31                             | Complex                        | RUNX1, TET2, TP53                    |
| 17                             | Relapsed                       | 4.8                            | 89                             | 46,t(X;X)(q22;q26)             | FLT3 -ITD and D835                   |
| 18                             | Relapsed                       | 4.6                            | 48                             | Complex                        | FLT3 -ITD, JAK2, RUNX1               |
| Samples for CFC assays         | Samples for CFC assays         | Samples for CFC assays         | Samples for CFC assays         | Samples for CFC assays         | Samples for CFC assays               |
| 19                             | De novo                        | 85.5                           | 51                             | 46,XX                          | DNMT3A, IDH2m NPM1, ASXL1            |
| 20                             | Relapsed                       | 2.4                            | 50                             | 47,XX,+8                       | RUNX1, ASXL1, IDH1, TET2, NRAS, KRAS |
| 21                             | Relapsed                       | 1.7                            | 82                             | Complex                        | ASXL1, EZH2, IDH1, TET2, RUNX1       |
| 22                             | Relapsed                       | 5.8                            | 32                             | Complex                        | DNMT3A, IDH1                         |
| Samples for CyTOF (only) study | Samples for CyTOF (only) study | Samples for CyTOF (only) study | Samples for CyTOF (only) study | Samples for CyTOF (only) study | Samples for CyTOF (only) study       |
| 23                             | Relapsed                       | 104.4                          | 3                              | Complex                        | IDH2                                 |
| 24                             | Relapsed                       | 163.5                          | 98                             | Complex                        | FLT3 -ITD                            |
| 25                             | Relapsed                       | 10.9                           | 10                             | Complex                        | IDH2                                 |
| 26                             | Relapsed                       | 5.1                            | 88                             | Complex                        | TP53, ATM                            |
| 27                             | Relapsed                       | 80.1                           | 72                             | 46,XX                          | No mutations                         |
| 28                             | Relapsed                       | 13.1                           | 63                             | 46,XX                          | TP53, IDH2                           |

AML: acute myeloid leukemia; WBC: white blood cell count; NA: not available; ITD: internal duplication; CFC: colony-forming cells; CyTOF: time-of-flight mass spectrometry .  For 5-day culture assays,  all samples were collected from peripheral blood,  except AML #15,  which was from bone marrow ,  and AML #1,  #5,  and #9,  which were from patient-derived xenograft mouse spleens. All the samples for CFC assays were bone marrow .

Figure 2. Treatment with cobimetinib and venetoclax causes on-target suppression of cell proliferation and impairs leukemia progenitor function in a subset of primary acute myeloid leukemia cases. (A) Primary acute myeloid leukemia (AML) peripheral blood mononuclear or bone marrow cells from AML cases were cultured in serum-free expansion medium supplemented with BIT 9500 Serum Substitute and cytokines, including stem cell factor (SCF; 100 ng/mL), Flt3 ligand (50 ng/mL), interleukin 3 (IL3; 20 ng/mL), and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF; 20 ng/mL) as well as StemRegenin 1 (SR1; 1 µ M). Cells were left untreated or treated with cobimetinib (Cobi) or venetoclax (Van), both at 0.1 µ M, as single agents or in combination (Combo). After culture for 5 days, cells were stained with CD45-PE, Annexin-V-APC, and DAPI. Apoptotic leukemia blasts (CD45dimAnnexin-V ) were isolated by flow cytometry. Results are expressed as percentage of specific apoptosis + calculated by the formula: 100 × (% apoptosis of treated cells - % apoptosis of control cells)/(100 - % apoptosis of control cells). Percentage of growth inhibition was calculated on the basis of the number of control viable cells (Annexin-V /DAPI ). ** --P &lt;0.01; *** P &lt;0.001. (B) Mononuclear cells collected from AML patients (100,000 cells) or healthy donors (50,000 cells; NBM) were plated in methylcellulose, then treated with venetoclax or cobimetinib (both at 0.1 µ M) as single agents or in combination. Colonies were scored on day 14. Data are presented as percentage inhibition compared to control groups. (C) The absolute cell counts of AML13 and AML14 samples as determined in (A) are shown in comparison with those of untreated controls (Contr), with median inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ) values indicated for each sample. (D) AML13 and AML14 samples were treated with cobimetinib 1.0 µ M overnight followed by 10 min with or without (Unstim) stimulation with SCF or G-CSF (100 ng/mL). Cells were fixed, permeabilized, and processed for time-of-lfight mass spectrometry. Spanning-tree progression analysis of density-normalized events (SPADE) trees were generated by using markers shown in Online Supplementary Figure S2 . The leukemia stem/progenitor populations were manually annotated and highlighted by analysis of all surface markers. The median intensities of pERK and pS6 in gated populations are shown. BCL2 expression in CD34 + and CD34 -fractions in both samples is shown. DMSO: dimethylsulfoxide.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 3. Pharmacodynamic markers of drug response identified through reverse-phase protein arrays and RNA sequencing. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines were left untreated or treated with cobimetinib or venetoclax as single agents or in combination at 0.5, 1, or 2 times the median inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ) value of each compound in each cell line for 24 h. Cell pellets were harvested after treatment and subjected to reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) analysis as previously reported. (A) Plots depict proteins differentially expressed between cobimetinib-sensitive and cobimetinib-resistant cells. (B) The mean values of corresponding proteins in cell lines showing synergy to the combination treatment (CI&lt;0.8 as presented in Table 1) are shown in the heatmap. Only the proteins showing significant differences ( P &lt;0.05) between control and treated groups are shown. C: untreated control; T: treated; S: sensitive; R: resistant; Syn: synergy. (C) Cells were treated with cobimetinib (Cobi), venetoclax (Ven), or a combination (Combo) at 10, 100 and 1000 nM for 4 h and subjected to lysis; proteins were separated and probed with the antibodies indicated. (D) AML cell lines were left untreated (control) or treated with cobimetinib or venetoclax as single agents or in combination at 10 times the median inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ) value of each compound in each cell line for 4 h. Cell pellets were harvested after treatment and subjected to electrochemiluminescent enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The levels of BCL2, MCL1, BCL2:BIM and MCL1:BIM complexes were plotted based on percentages of the levels in the control group. (E) AML cells were treated and processed as described above for the RPPA assay. RNA was isolated using the RNeasy kit and sent for mRNA sequencing. The enriched pathways in cell types showing synergy in response to the combination are shown.

data in four cell lines representing different response patterns (Table 1, Figure 3C and Online Supplementary Figure S5C ). Suppression of pERK by cobimetinib was observed in both sensitive (OCI-AML3 and MV4;11) and resistant (MOLM13  and  U937)  cells  at  0.01 µ M,  irrespective  of response  patterns.  pS6  (Ser235/236  or  Ser240/244)  was inhibited by a low dose (0.1 µ M) of cobimetinib in sensitive OCI-AML3 cells but not in resistant U937 cells (Figure 3C),  consistent  with  our  RPPA  findings  noted  above. These data also indicate direct suppression of mTORC1 signaling by cobimetinib as the Ser240/244 site is regulated exclusively by mTORC1. MYC was downregulated by cobimetinib alone or in combination with venetoclax in OCI-AML3, but not in U937 cells. Cell death characterized by elevated levels of cleaved PARP was observed in the  combination  group  in  OCI-AML3  cells,  consistent with  pro-apoptotic  synergy  (Figure  3C).  To  capture  the dynamic  interactions  of  pro-  and  anti-apoptotic  BCL2 family members, a Meso Scale Discovery assay was performed in OCI-AML3 cells (Figure 3D). High basal levels of BCL2 and BCL2:BIM complexes were identified. After venetoclax treatment, BCL2:BIM complexes were disrupted and MCL1 protein levels were upregulated, resulting in increased  MCL1:BIM  complexes.  The  combination  of cobimetinib with venetoclax suppressed both BCL2:BIM and MCL1:BIM complexes, enabling release of free BIM to induce  cell  death  (Figure  3D).  In  addition,  cobimetinib treatment  induced  total  BIM  protein  levels  in  MV4;11 cells, thereby priming the cells for death ( Online Supplementary Figure S7 ).

To refine our search for potential biomarkers correlating with  response  to  the  venetoclax-cobimetinib  combination, we performed RNA sequencing and evaluated differential  gene  expression  after  exposure  to  the  drugs.  The aim was to identify hallmark cancer pathways significantly altered specifically in cells sensitive to the drug combination (Figure 3E and Online Supplementary Table S2 ). Our analysis  demonstrated  that  several  downstream  pathways, including  MYC, E2F and their target  genes,  were significantly altered after treatment in cells that responded synergistically to the combination. Consistent with western blot data, mTORC1 signaling was also altered in cells showing  synergistic  responses.  Hypoxia  and  unfolded protein response (UPR) pathways were also significantly enriched,  possibly  downstream  of  mTOR/4EBP1/eIF4E signaling, which directs protein synthesis of HIF-1 α , 28 and can trigger the UPR. 29 Glycolysis, another enriched pathway, is regulated by the ERK signaling pathway through RNK126-mediated ubiquitination of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase, which may account for resistance to apoptosis. 30

## The combination of cobimetinib and venetoclax reduces leukemia burden in acute myeloid leukemia models in vivo

To  test  the  efficacy  of  cobimetinib  and  venetoclax in vivo , we induced leukemia in NSGS mice by injecting the animals with genetically engineered OCI-AML3/Luc/GFP cells. Leukemia engraftment was confirmed 1 week after injection using BLI. Mice were randomly distributed into four arms and dosed orally with vehicle, cobimetinib (10 mg/kg), venetoclax (100 mg/kg), or cobimetnib plus venetoclax  daily  for  28  days.  BLI  demonstrated  that  the leukemia  burden  was  significantly  reduced  in  treated groups  compared  to  controls  over  time  (Figure  4A).  At week 5, the tumor reduction was significantly greater in the groups that received single-agent cobimetinib ( P &lt;0.001) or cobimetnib plus venetoclax ( P &lt;0.001) than in the control group (Figure 4B). The tumor reduction was greater  following  combination  treatment  than  following venetoclax  ( P &lt;0.05)  or  cobimetinib  ( P &lt;0.05)  alone.  All drug treatments, including combinations, were tolerated in vivo based on minimal changes in body weights ( data not shown ).

As a second AML cell line-derived xenograft model, we introduced genetically engineered MOLM3/Luc/GFP cells into NSGS mice and initiated treatment as for the OCIAML3/Luc/GFP model. Again, BLI demonstrated significantly  reduced  leukemia  burden  in  the  treated  groups compared  to  controls  and  the  reduction  was  more  pronounced in the groups treated with single-agent venetoclax  or  cobimetinib  plus  venetoclax  (Figure  4C,  D). Additionally, human CD45 engraftment and cell counts in both  bone  marrow  and  spleen  demonstrated  a  trend toward decreased tumor burden in mice treated with the drug combination compared to that in mice treated with either agent alone ( Online Supplementary Figure S8A, B ). As in  the  OCI-AML3/Luc  xenograft  model,  all  drug  treatments were tolerated based on minimal changes in body weights.  We  performed  additional  PDX  studies  in  NSG mice using an AML PDX generated from primary sample AML11 (Table 2). The mice were treated with the same doses of drugs as those used in the cell line models. As shown in Online Supplementary Figure S9 , the combination therapy  extended  survival  in  the  AML11  PDX  model. These data demonstrate that the combination of cobimetinib plus venetoclax potently suppresses leukemia burden in tumor-bearing mice in vivo at tolerable doses.

## Discussion

Although  gain-of-function  mutations  often  represent secondary events in the pathogenesis of AML, 31,32 they are required for AML maintenance and are therefore attractive therapeutic  targets. 33 While  MEK  inhibitors  have demonstrated limited activity in AML as single agents, 15,34 preclinical  studies  with  first  generation  MEK  and  BCL2 inhibitors demonstrated synergistic induction of apoptosis by suppression of MCL1 following MEK inhibition. 11,35

In this study, five of the 11 AML cell lines tested were sensitive  to  cobimetinib,  including  two  that  harbored  a FLT3 -ITD mutation (MOLM14 and MV4;11) and one with an NRAS mutation (OCI-AML3). Consistent with previous  reports,  the  baseline  levels  of  ERK  phosphorylation did not  correlate with  response  to  cobimetinib. 21,36 Venetoclax as a single agent had activity in five of the cell lines tested while the combination with cobimetinib was synergistic in seven of the cell lines, including those that were resistant to each agent alone.

To extend our preliminary findings in cell lines, we studied  a  selection  of  genetically  diverse  primary  AML patients' samples. Venetoclax induced pronounced apoptosis (&gt;50%) in only three of the samples (16.7%), a rate similar to that of clinical responses  to venetoclax monotherapy (19%), 10 possibly reflecting protective properties of the tumor microenvironment, as our culture conditions were cytokine-rich. Cobimetinib induced very limited cell death in all AML samples, consistent with previous  reports  that  MEK  inhibitors  preferentially  suppress

proliferation  and  promote  differentiation,  rather  than induce death. 33,37,38 Remarkably, over 60% of patients' samples  responded  to  the  combination  therapy,  notably including samples that were insensitive to both agents on their  own.  Moreover,  these  responders  carried  diverse genetic  alterations  that  affect  leukemia  cell  proliferation ( FLT3 , RAS ),  differentiation  ( RUNX1 ),  genomic  stability ( NPM1 ),  and  epigenetic  modifications  ( TET2 , IDH1 and IDH2 ).  Clonogenic assays demonstrated that the combination  markedly  impaired  the  colony-forming  functions

<!-- image -->

Figure 4. In vivo administration of cobimetinib in combination with venetoclax demonstrated anti-leukemia efficacy in acute myeloid leukemia xenograft mouse models. (A) NSGS mice were injected intravenously with OCI-AML3-Luci-GFP cells (1.0×10 ). Leukemia engraftment was confirmed 1 week later through a nonin6 vasive in vivo bioluminescence imaging (BLI) system following injection with a D-luciferin (4 mg/mouse) substrate. Mice were dosed daily with oral vehicle or an orally active form of cobimetinib (Cobi; 10 mg/kg) or venetoclax (Ven; 100 mg/kg) or their combination (Combo) for 4 weeks. BLI data over time are shown. (B) Luciferase intensity [mean ± standard deviation(SD)] at week 5. Human CD45 engraftment in bone marrow and spleen was determined by time-of-flight mass spectrometry (C) BLI data over time from the leukemia model established with MOLM13-Luc-GFP cells (1×10 6 per animal) in NSGS mice. Mice received treatment as for the OCI-AML3/Luc/GFP model for 14 days. (D) Quantification of BLI signals (mean ± SD)  on day 17 in the MOLM13 model. * P &lt;0.05; ** P &lt;0.01; *** P &lt;0.001; **** &lt;0.0001. P

of AML progenitors, while normal progenitors were only minimally affected.

CyTOF has proven to be a powerful approach for identifying  functional  proteins  in  diverse  cell  populations  at single-cell  levels. 39 Several  groups,  including  ours,  have studied  the  feasibility  of  CyTOF  in  AML. 26,40,41 In  this study,  we  utilized  CyTOF  combined  with  SPADE  software 42 to investigate the efficacy of cobimetinib and venetoclax  in  two  primary  patients'  samples:  one  responder and  one  non-responder.  BCL2  was  highly  expressed  in CD34 + stem/progenitor cells compared to the CD34 -cells, underlying the critical need for BCL2 inhibition to eliminate  LSC.  The  venetoclax-sensitive  sample  displayed  a higher  level  of  BCL2  protein  than  the  resistant  sample. Cobimetinib inhibited G-CSF-induced pERK irrespective of response status. In line with several studies reporting that suppression of mTORC1 and its downstream pathways (specifically S6) predicted sensitivity to MEK inhibition, 21,22 our data also demonstrated that the pS6 signaling pathway was suppressed in the  cobimetinib-responding sample,  suggesting  that  S6  phosphorylation  may  be  a more predictive pharmacodynamic marker for MEK inhibition. However, the latter requires validation in a larger cohort of samples from patients.

The  distinct  response  patterns  in  AML  cell  lines  and patients' samples led us to search for additional pharmacodynamic  markers  correlating  with  drug  responses  using proteomic  and  transcriptomic  profiling.  In  line  with  the findings  of  an  extensive  study  of  MEK  inhibition, 20 we observed bypass induction of pMEK signaling upon MEK inhibition,  which  was  more  pronounced  in  cobimetinibresistant cell lines. Several signaling pathways were highly activated in cobimetinib-sensitive cell lines, including pS6, pERK,  p38MAPK,  and  pPTEN.  Lauchle  and  colleagues demonstrated  that  leukemia  clones  with  pre-existing resistance to MEK inhibition displayed reduced p38 kinase activity and increased RasGRP1 levels. 13 It was also previously reported that the RSK signaling pathway, which is downstream of MAPK, regulates an mTOR-independent pathway to induce S6 phosphorylation. 43 Western blotting analysis performed to validate the RPPA data showed that S6  phosphorylation  at  both  Ser235/236  and  Ser240/244 sites  was  markedly  suppressed  in  cobimetinib-sensitive OCI-AML3  and  MV4-11  cells.  In  OCI-AML3  cells,  the combination  treatment  resulted  in  significant  cell  death characterized  by  elevated  levels  of  cleaved  PARP ,  which could be attributed to disruption of BCL2:BIM complexes, releasing BIM to trigger apoptosis. We also observed BIM induction in MV4-11 cells, underscoring its critical role in the  efficacy  of  the  combination  of  BCL2  and  MEK inhibitors. 37,38,44 Although  RPPA  data  showed  no  modulation of MCL1 after cobimetinib treatment, both western blot and Meso Scale Discovery assays showed downregulation  of  MCL1  in  OCL-AML3 cells  and  upregulation  of MCL1 after venetoclax treatment. These data suggest that increased  MCL1  levels  induced  by  venetoclax  favor  the formation of MCL1:BIM complexes were disrupted, freeing BIM to initiate apoptosis. Consistent with these findings, we recently showed that MCL-1 degradation associated  with  MDM2  inhibition  occurs  through  MEK/ERK suppression and GSK3 activation. 45 The downregulation of MYC  levels  by  cobimetinib  also  suggests  a  MEK/ERKGSK3 β link,  as  ubiquitination  and  degradation  of  MYC requires phosphorylation at T58 by GSK3 β . 46 Furthermore, RNA sequencing analyses revealed enhanced expression of MYC and E2F target genes in cells demonstrating a synergistic response to the cobimetinib-venetoclax combination. This finding is consistent with a previous report that MEK inhibition  sensitized  cells  to  ABT-263-induced  apoptosis by promoting a G1 cell cycle arrest. 37 Glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) are known to be regulated by ERK signaling through RNK126-mediated ubiquitination  of  pyruvate  dehydrogenase  kinase. 30 Potent  antitumor efficacy has been demonstrated in melanoma cells through  combined  inhibition  of  BCL2,  OXPHOS  and MAPK signaling. 47 Alterations  in  p53  and  UPR  pathways identified by transcriptome analysis may also account for synergy between MEK and BCL2 inhibition. 48 These proposed  mechanisms  of  actions  are  summarized  in Online Supplementary  Figure  S10 .  However  these  models  require further validation in controlled mechanistic studies.

The potency of the cobimetinib and venetoclax combination  was  further  demonstrated in  vivo using  models established with OCI-AML3 (resistant to venetoclax) and MOLM13  (resistant  to  cobimetinib)  leukemia  cells. Although  we  observed  strong  synergistic  effects  in  both cell lines in vitro , the combination did not confer significant survival benefits in the in vivo models. This may be due to protection  against  cell  death  provided  by  the  microenvironment,  as  we  have  observed  in  patients'  samples  cultured in cytokine-rich medium. Similar to our in vitro observations, the OCI-AML3 xenograft model is hypersensitive to cobimetinib, and we found no significant survival differences between animals that received single-agent cobimetinib and those that received the combination. In the very aggressive MOLM13 model, in which untreated mice die 3 weeks after cell injection, the combination reduced but did not eliminate leukemia burden markedly on day 17.

In summary, combinatorial blockade of the MAPK and BCL2 pathways promotes cell death and suppresses proliferation in the majority of primary AML cells. This antileukemia  efficacy  is  associated  with  the  simultaneous inhibition of BCL2 by venetoclax and the downregulation of MCL1 mediated by cobimetinib, which together enable the release of the pro-death protein BIM. These preclinical data provided a strong mechanistic rationale for evaluating the combination of cobimetinib with venetoclax in a phase I trial now  enrolling elderly patients with relapsed/refractory AML (NCT02670044), and initial data have included objective clinical responses. 49